# The EUMETSAT Ocean and Sea Ice SAF {#sec:osisaf}

The Satellite Application Facilities ([saf]{acronym-label="saf"
acronym-form="singular+short"}s) are dedicated centres of excellence for
processing satellite data - hosted by a National Meteorological
Service - which utilise specialist expertise from institutes based in
Member States. [eumetsat]{acronym-label="eumetsat"
acronym-form="singular+short"} created Satellite Application Facilities
(SAFs) to complement its Central Facilities capability in Darmstadt. The
Ocean and Sea Ice Satellite Application Facility
([osisaf]{acronym-label="osisaf" acronym-form="singular+short"}) is one
of eight EUMETSAT SAFs, which provide users with operational data and
software products. More on SAFs can be read at
[www.eumetsat.int](www.eumetsat.int){.uri}.

The objective of the OSI SAF is the operational near-real-time
production and distribution of a coherent set of information, derived
from earth observation satellites, and characterising the ocean surface
and the energy fluxes through it: sea surface temperature, radiative
fluxes, wind vector and sea ice characteristics. For some variables, the
OSI SAF is also aiming at providing long term data records for climate
applications, based on reprocessing activities.

The sea ice products include sea ice concentration, the sea ice
emissivity at 50 GHz, sea ice edge, sea ice type and sea ice drift and
sea ice surface temperature (from mid 2014).

The sea ice processing is performed at the High Latitude processing
facility ([hl]{acronym-label="hl" acronym-form="singular+short"}
centre), operated jointly by the Norwegian and Danish Meteorological
Institutes.

# Disclaimer {#sec:disclaimer}

All intellectual property rights of the OSI SAF products belong to
EUMETSAT. The use of these products is granted to every interested user,
free of charge. If you wish to use these products, EUMETSAT's copyright
credit must be shown by displaying the words \"Copyright Â© YYYY
EUMETSAT\" or the OSI SAF logo on each of the products used.

Note : The comments that we get from our users is an important input
when defining development activities and updates, and user feedback to
the OSI SAF project team is highly valued.

### Acknowledgement and citation

Use of the product(s) should be acknowledged with the following
citation:
