# Overview {#sec:overview}

The global low-resolution sea-ice drift CDR OSI/̄455 pertains of daily
maps of sea-ice drift vectors for both Arctic and Antarctic sea ice. It
is derived from pairs of daily averaged satellite images and uses a
tailored algorithms named the Continuous Maximum Cross-Correlation
(CMCC, [@lavergne:2010:cmcc-jgr]). It also uses a free/̄drift model,
driven by wind vectors from NWP, to provide continuity during the summer
melt season.

The CDR OSI/̄455 has a strong heritage from the  near-real-time
low-resolution sea-ice drift product, known as the OSI/̄405 product.
OSI/̄405 was first developed in the period 2007-2009 with support from
International Polar Year (IPY) projects such as EU DAMOCLES and
iAOOS-Norway. The operational production was introduced in December
2009, at first only for the Arctic. Later versions of OSI/̄405 introduced
coverage of the Southern Hemisphere (early 2012), provision of vectors
during the summer melt season (mid 2016), and introduction of per-vector
uncertainties (mid 2016). Several intermediate updates were implemented
to take on board newer satellite sensors (e.g. SSMIS in early 2014,
AMSR2 in early 2015). Due to all these updates, it is recognized that
OSI/̄405 has limited value for climate studies, hence the need for a
Climate Data Record.

In 2021, the OSI/̄405 algorithm baseline was adapted for the preparation
of the CDR OSI/̄455. The main addition is the use of a free-drift model
to compute wind-driven sea-ice drift vectors during the summer melt
period.
